     computation

Article

Image Segmentation for Cardiovascular Biomedical
Applications at Different Scales

Alexander Danilov 1,*, Roman Pryamonosov 1, and Alexandra Yurova 1,2,
 1 Institute of Numerical Mathematics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Gubkina 8, 119333 Moscow, Russia;
       pryamonosovra@yandex.ru (R.P.); alexandra.yurova@gmail.com (A.Y.)
 2 Faculty of Computational Mathematics and Cybernetics, Lomonosov Moscow State University,
       Leninskie Gory 1, 119991 Moscow, Russia
 * Correspondence: a.a.danilov@gmail.com; Tel.: +7-495-984-8120
  These authors contributed equally to this work.

 Academic Editors: Gennady Bocharov, Olga Solovyova and Vitaly Volpert
 Received: 30 June 2016; Accepted: 5 September 2016; Published: 15 September 2016

 Abstract: In this study, we present several image segmentation techniques for various image scales
 and modalities. We consider cellular-, organ-, and whole organism-levels of biological structures
 in cardiovascular applications. Several automatic segmentation techniques are presented and
 discussed in this work. The overall pipeline for reconstruction of biological structures consists of the
 following steps: image pre-processing, feature detection, initial mask generation, mask processing,
 and segmentation post-processing. Several examples of image segmentation are presented,
 including patient-specific abdominal tissues segmentation, vascular network identification and
 myocyte lipid droplet micro-structure reconstruction.

 Keywords: image segmentation; abdominal tissues; coronary arteries; cerebral arteries; electron
 microscopy; cardiovascular applications

1. Introduction

      Numerical modeling in biomedical applications has remained a challenge for many years.
Individualized numerical simulations of physiological processes in the human body received a great
deal of attention over several decades, and a vast number of models have been described in the
literature. Contemporary resolution of medical images and new algorithms for their post-processing
allow us to develop high resolution numerical models of various processes at cellular-, organ-, and
whole organism-levels [1­5]. Given an imaging dataset, one performs image segmentation, volume
reconstruction, and numerical discretization. In this paper, we present and develop methods and
algorithms for construction of patient-specific and cellular micro-structure discrete geometric models
for cardiovascular biomedical applications.

      The cornerstone of medical image processing is the segmentation process that assigns labels
to the voxels. Each biomedical application imposes specific restrictions on both the input medical
images and the output patient-specific model, and, therefore, calls for a specific class of 3D
segmentation methods. Various medical image segmentation techniques have been developed [6­8].
The most promising fully automatic segmentation methods belong to the class of atlas-based
segmentation techniques [9­11]. The patient-specific segmentation is obtained from the atlas of
presegmented images of other individuals. This atlas should contain enough different cases for
accurate mapping of the new patient data. Thus, the atlas-based approach requires a huge amount of
expert segmentation for preparation of atlases and development of algorithms dealing with big data.
The application area of atlas-based methods is limited due to lack of the specialized presegmented

Computation 2016, 4, 35; doi:10.3390/computation4030035  www.mdpi.com/journal/computation
Computation 2016, 4, 35  2 of 16

atlases. Semi-automatic or supervised segmentation technologies require interaction with the expert.
They are used primarily for segmentation of particular organs and tissues.

      In this paper, we focus on two cardiovascular applications: haemodynamics and
electrophysiology modeling. One can consider the cardiovascular modeling at different scales.
The electrocardiography (ECG) forward calculations require the patient-specific segmented thoracic
model [12,13]. The bidomain electrophysiology simulation requires the detailed model of the
heart ventricles and atria. Whole body haemodynamics modeling requires the full blood vessel
network [3,4,14]. Local haemodynamics modeling requires the patient-specific local reconstruction
of coronary and cerebral arteries [15,16]. The analysis of internal structure of cardiac cells requires
the volume reconstruction of micro-structures [17]. Different image acquisition and segmentation
techniques are used in these applications.

      In this study, we address several segmentation techniques for contrast-enhanced Computed
Tomography (ceCT), contrast-enhanced Computed Tomography Angiography (ceCTA), and Electron
Microscopy (EM) images. The overall pipeline for reconstruction of biological structures
in cardiovascular applications consists of the following common steps: image pre-processing,
feature detection, initial mask generation, mask processing, and segmentation post-processing.
The pre-processing step is usually used to smooth the input data and filter noise. Feature detection is
a very application-specific step: we use textural features [18] for segmentation of parenchymal organs
and vesselness filter [19] for arteries segmentation. We also utilize different mask generation, mask
processing, and segmentation post-processing methods in our applications: the level set methods [20]
are used for parenchymal organs, and isoperimetric distance trees [21] and distance ordered
homotopic thinning [22,23] are used in vessel segmentation. The modality- and structure-specific
features of segmentation process are presented in detail in this work.

      Various segmentation methods are used for generation of discrete models suitable for ECG
forward calculations. In our previous work, we used several techniques for adaptation of the
segmented reference human model to different individuals. This technique relies on anthropometric
scaling, control points mapping and supervised segmentation [24,25]. We extend our segmentation
techniques for electrophysiology modeling and ECG forward calculations with heart ventricles and
the atria supervised segmentation method [26]. In this paper, we evaluate several ideas for automatic
segmentation of thorax and abdominal tissues using ceCT images in order to improve ECG modeling.

      Our previous technique of coronary artery segmentation and graph network reconstruction for
haemodynamics modeling [23] is improved and extended for both coronary and cerebral arteries
using ceCTA. This technique reconstructs both the 3D segmented image and 1D centerlines network.
The segmented image may be used for 3D discrete mesh generation, and the 1D vessels network may
be used in 1D haemodynamics modeling. The improved algorithm for coronary artery segmentation
includes an additional aorta border cleaning step. The cerebral artery segmentation method is
designed in the same way as in [23,27,28].

      There are several approaches for cerebral artery segmentation. Some of them [29,30] are focused
only on the brain arteries, ignoring neck vessels. Another semi-automatic approach is based on the
level set methods [31]. Olivier Cuisenaire, in his work [32], takes advantage of the active objects
method, requiring the localization of initial seed points at the vessel ends; user interaction is reduced
by the use of a patient-adapted anatomical model. However, in some cases, supervised initialization
is still required. Our technique is based on the following idea. First, all arteries in the domain are
segmented by the vesselness filter; second, the 1D structure is reconstructed by the thinning process.
Thus, blood vessel ends are extracted automatically and no initial seeds are required.

      In this work, we discuss the segmentation techniques for reconstruction of cardiac cell
micro-structure from EM images. The huge size of typical EM images requires the use of automatic
methods. The supervoxels, shape features, and machine learning techniques may be used to
reduce the problem sizes and detect specific micro-structures [33]. In our work, we uncovered
Computation 2016, 4, 35  3 of 16

inhomogeneity in some myocyte lipid droplets; and we applied basic threshold-based methods for
reconstruction of internal structure of these lipid droplets.

      In this study, we present in detail the segmentation techniques for cardiovascular biomedical
applications, the enhanced automatic algorithm for coronary and cerebral arteries segmentation with
alternative segmentation correction step, and the reconstruction of inhomogeneous structure of lipid
droplets in human myocyte cells.

      The paper outline is as follows. In Section 2, we discuss and present segmentation methods for
ceCT, ceCTA, and EM images. In particular, we consider segmentation of abdominal parenchymal
organs, coronary and cerebral arteries, and myocyte micro-structure. In Section 3, we demonstrate
the results of the proposed techniques. Section 4 concludes the paper with discussions.

2. Segmentation Techniques

      The bioelectrical inhomogeneities of the human thorax affect the ECG forward calculation.
Reconstruction of a fully heterogeneous model remains time-consuming and labor-intensive as
a complete automatic segmentation is not available. Recent research on influence of different
tissues [34] on ECG signals suggests that muscle, lungs and fat tissues are more important than the
others. Most of these tissues can be segmented automatically [35­38]. In this paper, we will focus on
segmentation of abdominal parenchymal organs. The liver is a typical example of these organs. Its
size and proximity to the heart indicate noticeable influence on ECG modeling.

2.1. Segmentation of Abdominal Parenchymal Organs

      In this part, we propose a method for segmentation of abdominal parenchymal organs. The main
steps of the algorithm are binary mask generation using analysis of CT texture features and further
extraction of the 3D organ models.

      The fully automatic segmentation of abdominal cavity is a complicated task because of several
factors. First, there is a large anatomical variability of patients; second, medical images come
from different devices and have different properties; third, similar intensity values for adjacent
organs make boundary detection difficult. To partly overcome this problem, we considered
contrast-enhanced CT as input data. Multiphase CT-scans are performed in order to enhance contrast
between anatomical structures. The main phases of enhancement are as follows: without contrast
(non-enhanced CT), arterial, portal and late phase. In our research, the smoothed CT-scans of the
portal phase are used.

      We have experimented with several segmentation techniques. In [39], we proposed a method
of the piecewise affine mapping of the segmented reference model. This transformation requires a
set of the control points defined on both reference and patient images. Control point localization
is a very time-consuming task that requires a good understanding of human anatomy. We have
also investigated some strategies based on the voxel clustering [33,40]. The clusterization algorithm
takes into account only intensities and distances between voxels. However, the abdominal organs
boundaries are not always clear, since the intensity ranges overlap. Therefore, some clusters contain
voxels belonging to different tissues. It makes further cluster processing complicated. In addition,
parameters of cluster generation highly depend on intensity range of the input image, which makes
fully automatic segmentation difficult. We also implemented several methods proposed in [41]. Most
of them are based on the gray level analysis and take into account anatomical peculiarities of the
patient. These semi-automatic methods are rather good, but are sensitive to dataset variations because
of gray levels variability between patients.

      We propose a method that is robust to inter-patient gray level and anatomical variability.
The main idea is based on two properties of parenchymal organs: homogeneous structure and
relatively sharp boundaries on the images with contrast. We use texture analysis to measure these
properties. In [18], some texture features were proposed for 2D image classification. We used these
ideas for segmentation of 3D medical images.
Computation 2016, 4, 35                                4 of 16

      Textural features are computed using s × s × s voxel neighborhood, where s is an odd number
greater than 1. In our study, we considered several textural features: contrast, inverse difference
moment, second angular moment, etc. From all experimental results, the entropy was chosen as
the most informative and easily processed. It is easy to verify that the range of entropy values is
[0; ln n(s)], where n(s) = 6 × (s - 2)3 + 5 × 6 × (s - 2)2 + 4 × 12 × (s - 2) + 3 × 8, is the doubled
number of connections in the cubic neighborhood. Let p be the spatial-dependence matrix [18], p(i, j)
be its (i, j) entry. One can prove that entropy

                         ENT = -  p(i, j) ln(p(i, j))                                              (1)

                         i,j

achieves its maximum value ln n(s), if the number of different adjacent voxel pairs is equal to the
number of connections in the neighborhood.

      This entropy property describes two important anatomical peculiarities used for segmentation
process in this study: voxels inside of parenchymal organs have low entropy values because of
the homogeneous structure and voxels of the boundary have high values because of diversity of
intensities in the neighborhood.

      Figure 1 demonstrates the result of entropy computation for different neighborhood
sizes (s = 3, 5). Experiments with different datasets have shown that the 3 × 3 × 3 voxel neighborhood
(s = 3) is sufficient for parenchymal organs detection. In this case, n(3) = 108 and ENT  [0, 5).
Using thresholding, we can obtain the corresponding binary masks (rf. Figure 2). Analyzing a
histogram, we have selected thresholds for s = 3 equal to three and verified it experimentally with CT
images of different patients. This threshold value provides rather good results for different datasets.

Figure 1. Entropy computed for two different neighborhood sizes: (a) 3 × 3 × 3 voxels and
(b) 5 × 5 × 5 voxels.

Figure 2. Binary masks obtained from the results of entropy computation: (a) 3 × 3 × 3 voxels and
(b) 5 × 5 × 5 voxels.
Computation 2016, 4, 35                                                                  5 of 16

      The second step of our algorithm is 3D volume extraction. Binary mask does not represent
organs as separated components because of the multiple "leaks". We use active contours method
for extraction of parenchymal organs. We compared several implementations of active contours
methods [20,42,43]. The most convenient one for our purposes is the level set function implemented
in Convert3D tool from ITK SNAP (Philadelphia, PA, USA) ([44]). The coordinates of seed points can
be found automatically using prior anatomical knowledge.

      The evolution of closed surface C(u, v; t) is governed by the equation:

                         C  =  (gI  -  )-n ,                                             (2)
                         t

where -n is the unit normal vector to the contour. Two forces act on the contour in the normal

direction: gI is the internal force (the propagation term) and  is the external force (the spatial
modifier term), where  is the mean curvature of the contour, gI is the speed function computed from
the input image, and ,  are scalar constants. Equation (2) describes the velocity of every point of

the contour at any moment of time. The propagation term is proportional to the values of the feature

image, computed from the input image voxelwise by some function. The advantage of our method

is that the binary mask from the previous step is used directly as a feature image eliminating the

necessity to compute it explicitly. The spatial modifier term controls the smoothness of the evolving

contour and is approximately proportional to the curvature of the contour at the point.

Relation between forces can be controlled by setting appropriate parameters. One can easily

change parameters and observe regions growing using ITK SNAP user graphical interface (Active

Contour Segmentation Mode, [44]). To avoid contour evolution into neighboring structures, we have

to maintain a certain smooth shape by setting the spatial modifier term significantly bigger than the

propagation term: 0.9­1.0 and 0.1­0.25, respectively. One can slow down contour evolution into

domains with high curvature and effectively smooth organ surfaces.

The summary of our algorithm for parenchymal organs segmentation is presented below:

1. Pre-process and smooth the input dataset.
2. Compute the spatial-dependence matrix (specified in [18]) for all voxels of the smoothed dataset.
3. Compute entropy (1) for each voxel using the spatial-dependence matrix.
4. Obtain the binary mask by entropy values thresholding.
5. Set the seed points for organs extraction.
6. Implement active contours method and extract 3D model.

      The results of the proposed segmentation technique are presented in Section 3. This algorithm
is especially useful for segmentation of a liver, which is one of the significant organs during
ECG modeling.

2.2. Vessel Segmentation

      In this section, we propose algorithms for automatic segmentation of coronary and cerebral
human arteries. We assume that the input data is a 3D DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications
in Medicine) dataset acquired using ceCTA protocol. All algorithms presented in this section are
developed for uniform cubic voxel grids; the anisotropic dataset should be resampled prior to
segmentation. We also assume that each voxel has 26 adjacent voxels, i.e., voxels with common face,
edge or vertex.

      Both segmentation techniques are based on the Isoperimetric Distance Trees (IDT) algorithm [21]
and Frangi Vesselness filter [19]. Output segmentations are represented by the binary masks that are
useful for skeletonization post-processing.

      Algorithms for coronary and cerebral cases are almost similar and consist of next essential steps:

1. Segment the aorta.
2. Remove pulmonary arteries.
3. (Cerebral case only) Darken bone intensities.
Computation 2016, 4, 35  6 of 16

4. Apply Frangi Vesselness filter.
5. Locate the ostia points or aortic arch branches and segment the vessels.
6. Clean aorta border.

      The aorta segmentation algorithm was presented in our previous work [23]. In the current work,
we extend this algorithm to cerebral datasets. Pulmonary arteries are removed by the morphological
operations proposed in [27]. Bone elimination is an essential step for cerebral artery segmentation
due to vertebral arteries and cervical vertebrae proximity. Assuming both CT and ceCTA datasets are
available for the same patient, bones can be automatically darkened with the multiscale matched
mask bone elimination algorithm [45]. Otherwise, bones should be segmented and eliminated
manually. Ostia points are detected as two distant vesselness maxima near aorta border. Aortic arch
branches are defined as connected components of voxels with high vesselness, lying close to aorta
border. Aorta border cleaning is the final step, which is necessary since high vesselness values may
falsely occur near big bright structures.

      We employ the IDT algorithm for aorta segmentation, since aorta is much larger than coronary
or cerebral vessels and its segmentation using vesselness filtering is very time consuming. The IDT
method starts from the binary mask Minit and a voxel c, it cuts the mask Minit through bottlenecks
and outputs submask MA containing c. Full automatic aorta segmentation can be achieved with the
Circle Hough Transform (CHT) [46] (we use its implementation in ITK library [47]). The transform is
used to detect the largest bright disk D and its radius RA on transverse planes. This disk is an aorta
cross-section. Initial mask is acquired by thresholding method with a minimal intensity inside of the
disk tinit as a threshold parameter. The center of the disk is considered as the initial voxel c.

      After the IDT stage, some parts of aortic arch branches or coronary arteries may still be included
in MA. In the coronary case a simple morphological smoothing of MA is sufficient in order to remove
coronary parts and to keep the mask intact. However, carotid and subclavian arteries are bigger than
the coronary arteries and thus algorithm requires more sophisticated approach for their removal.

      To this end, we define mask smoothing with parameter p as successive deletion of p voxels thick
border from the mask (p-border) and addition of p-border. Details of the smoothing method are
discussed in [23]. We should note that the smoothing procedure with high parameter values distorts
input masks. Next, we use three parameters r, R, t to remove coronary and cerebral arteries from
the aorta mask MA. The specific values of these parameters are presented in Section 3. We assume
the mask MA is already smoothed with a parameter r and coronary vessels are already excluded.
In order to remove the aortic arch branches, the mask MA is copied to the mask Msmooth and Msmooth
is smoothed with high parameter R. After that step, Msmooth is distorted but no longer contains any
parts of carotid or subclavian arteries. We add t-border to the mask Msmooth and intersect it with
the mask MA. The last step allows the resulting mask to keep intact the border of the mask MA.
To summarize, we refer the reader to the next algorithm:

1. Compute the radius and the center c of the largest bright disk D on transverse planes using
      CHT method.

2. Construct the connected region mask Minit containing voxel c with the minimal intensity inside
      of D as the lower threshold.

3. Obtain MA as a result of the IDT method applied to the mask Minit and the seed c.
4. Smooth the mask MA with the parameter r.
5. (Cerebral case only) Copy mask MA to mask Msmooth. Delete R-border from Msmooth, then add

      (R + t)-border.
6. (Cerebral case only) Intersect the mask MA with the mask Msmooth.

      Frangi vesselness filter is a useful instrument for vessel segmentation since it results in high
vesselness values inside of the vessels and low values elsewhere. However, the filter may also
produce high values near large bright structures like aorta. Authors of [27] proposed the modified
vesselness function; however, we observed false filter response only near the aorta, and, thus,
Computation 2016, 4, 35  7 of 16

we propose an alternative approach for segmentation correction only near the aorta border. It should
be noted that conventional remove-islands procedure may not eliminate the segmentation errors since
false regions are attached to the arteries.

      We define distance map dmapM(v) as the distance to the mask M for each voxel v. The detailed
description of distance maps and its construction process are presented in [23]. We assume the mask
MV represents the vessels, and the mask MA represents only the aorta. We define the voxel layer
Ld = {v  MV |dmapMA (v) = d} as a subset of mask MV distanced from the mask MA by the
distance d. Note that distance is measured in voxels, and it depends on the metric used in distance
map construction. For each voxel layer Ld for d = dmax, . . . , 0 we apply the following procedure:
remove all voxels from Ld that have no adjacent voxels in Ld+1. The parameter dmax should be big
enough, so that voxel layer Ldmax contains no segmentation errors. In our practice, we set dmax = 15.

2.3. Segmentation of Lipid Droplets

      In this paragraph, we discuss a specific technique for segmentation of internal structure of lipid
droplets in human myocyte cells. The myocyte 3D structure is obtained by electron microscopy (EM)
that is a key technique to observe tissues on cellular level. One of the EM techniques is a 3D focused
ion beam (FIB) method. FIB is applied to the tissue, which was previously embedded and repeatedly
milled layer by layer (each about 10 nm thick). These layers may shift during the procedure, hence all
segmentation techniques for EM-FIB data require preliminary slice alignment. For additional details
on the FIB method, we refer to [17].

       Figure 3. Segmentation of the lipid droplet. (a) sharp image slice and (b) its noisy thresholding result;
       (c) blurred slice; and (d) its thresholding result.

      The shape of lipid droplets may be easily extracted using threshold method and edge
detector [17], since the lipids have the lowest intensities in the FIB images. The internal structure
of some inhomogeneous lipid droplets is noticeable by detailed examination. Figure 3 demonstrates
Computation 2016, 4, 35  8 of 16

the region containing lipid droplet. This region was cropped from the original EM-FIB data
provided by I.R. Efimov of the George Washington University, Department of Biomedical Engineering
(Washington, DC, USA).

      The structure of the lipid droplets is represented by two intensity ranges: darker intensities
represent the inhomogeneous inclusions, and slightly brighter ones determine the shape of the lipid
droplet. A naive thresholding approach may produce incorrect results due to different sharpness
of 2D image slices. Some of the slices are sharp with low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and the
others are blurred. We noticed that threshold may be applied successfully only in the case of the
smoothed images. Taking it into account, one can smooth the sharp 2D slices and threshold all slices
eventually, producing satisfying results. Alternatively, one can apply the 3D Gaussian smoothing to
the whole lipid droplet region rather than search for the sharp 2D slices manually. The remove-islands
procedure is applied as a final post-processing step. This procedure removes the disconnected regions
with volume lower than the parameter threshold.

      All steps may be formalized in the next algorithm:

1. Align all 2D slices of the image dataset.
2. Detect all lipid droplets using the threshold method (ref. [17]).
3. Apply Gaussian smoothing in the vicinity of the lipid droplet.
4. Segment inhomogeneous inclusions by thresholding with the lower parameter.
5. Apply 3D remove-islands procedure.

      The two threshold parameters correspond to the local minima of the intensity histogram of
the cropped FIB dataset (Figure 4). The left peak represents the intensities of the inhomogeneous
inclusions, the middle peak represents the intensities inside of lipid droplet, and the right peak
represents the intensities of surrounding cell structures. The intensity histogram of the homogeneous
lipid droplet does not contain explicit local minimum inside the droplet intensity range.

       Figure 4. Intensity histogram (black line) of the cropped FIB dataset containing inhomogeneous lipid
       droplet; The red line shows the threshold for inhomogeneous inclusions; the blue line--the threshold
       of lipid droplet.

      The cell organelles with easily detectable boundaries and distinct internal structure may be
segmented using the similar technique.

3. Results

      All proposed methods were implemented in our research code using Python and C programming
languages. Several intermediate steps were performed using third-party software packages.

      The parenchymal organs segmentation technique was implemented using Python programming
language. We demonstrate results of experiments on two DICOM datasets. The first dataset represent
normal abdominal CTA in venous phase obtained from DICOM with alias name OBELIX from the
OsiriX samples database [48]. The second anonymized DICOM dataset was provided by the staff of
I. M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.
Computation 2016, 4, 35                                                              9 of 16

      The entropy feature computation is a computationally expensive step, thus a separate massive
parallel OpenCL-based (Open Computing Language) version of the code was implemented using
PyOpenCL package. Both sequential CPU (Central Processing Unit) and parallel GPU (Graphics
Processing Unit) versions were tested. Intel Core i7 CPU (Santa Clara, CA, USA) was used for CPU
version of the code. The GPU version was executed on NVIDIA graphic card GeForce GT 740M
(Santa Clara, CA, USA). Both versions result in exactly the same entropy feature distribution, though
the GPU version is considerably faster. The computation times of both versions are presented in the
Table 1.

       Table 1. Results of entropy feature computation for two Computed Tomography (CT) datasets: image
       dimensions and computation times for both Central Processing Unit (CPU) and Graphics Processing
       Unit (GPU) version of the program code.

                         Dataset Size, Voxels  CPU Time, s  GPU Time, s

                            512 × 335 × 200          735          139
                            430 × 346 × 277         1189          198

      The results of spleen and liver segmentation with parameters  = 0.2,  = 0.95 from (2) are
presented in Figures 5 and 6. The 3D model generation was performed using ITK SNAP software
(version 3.4.0, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA) [44].

                         Figure 5. Results of spleen segmentation:  = 0.2,  = 0.95.
Computation 2016, 4, 35  10 of 16

                                   Figure 6. Results of liver segmentation:  = 0.2,  = 0.95.

      The vessel segmentation algorithms were tested on several coronary and cerebral ceCTA images.
Anonymized DICOM datasets were provided by the staff of I. M. Sechenov First Moscow State
Medical University. Several examples of false vesselness filter responses during segmentation process
are presented in Figure 7a­c. The distance map based correction procedure is used as described above
for final segmentation (rf. Figure 7c,d).

       Figure 7. Segmentation errors near aorta border: (a) coronary arteries may be either connected
       or disconnected with segmentation "leaks"; (b) errors near ostia points show that false vesselness
       filter response may be both inside and outside of the aorta; (c) errors in the cerebral case and
       (d) result of our algorithm application. Green--aorta, red--mask of coronary vessels, purple--mask
       of cerebral vessels.

      Cerebral vessels segmentation algorithm was tested on two ceCTA DICOM datasets
with resolutions 512 × 512 × 501 voxels and 512 × 512 × 451 voxels and voxel spacing
0.76 × 0.76 × 0.80 mm and 0.62 × 0.62 × 0.80 mm, respectively. Although the original algorithm was
designed for cubic voxel grids, the experiments on slightly anisotropic grids show good results.

      Bones were removed manually due to lack of non-enhanced CT data. The parameters r, R and t
of the aorta segmentation algorithm were set in accordance with experiments to provide anatomically
correct results:
Computation 2016, 4, 35                                                                      11 of 16

                            r  =  1  R  A  ,  R  =  2  R  A  ,  t  =  1  R  A  ,                   (3)
                                  3                 3                 7

where RA is the actual radius of aorta cross-section estimated by CHT. Frangi Vesselness parameters
were set to 0.2, 0.5, 500 and filter was computed at scales 1­5 (ref. [23] for details). In both cases,

subclavian, carotid, vertebral arteries and the circle of Willis were successfully segmented. Figure 8

demonstrates the results of automatic segmentation. CPU times are presented in Table 2 for the same

Intel Core i7 CPU machine.

Figure 8. Results of cerebral arteries segmentation: (a,b) resulting segmentations, green--aorta,
purple--cerebral arteries.

                         Table 2. CPU times of cerebral arteries segmentation.

         Dataset                             Dataset 1                        Dataset 2

       Resolution                        512 × 512 × 501                  512 × 512 × 451
         Spacing                     0.76 × 0.76 × 0.80 mm            0.62 × 0.62 × 0.80 mm

 Pulmonary removal                              7.76 s                           7.04 s
 Aorta segmentation                            16.61 s                          15.33 s
                                              196.40 s                         184.91 s
   Frangi Vesselness                            7.61 s                           6.67 s
Aortic arch branches                            7.39 s                           6.76 s
Aorta border cleaning

      The vascular network 1D graphs were reconstructed from the segmented images and were
used in haemodynamics numerical modeling in the work [49]. The coronary arteries segmentation
algorithm was thoroughly tested in our previous works [23,50].

      The proposed segmentation technique for reconstruction of the lipid droplets internal structure
was tested on the FIB dataset that was produced the same way as in [17]. The original image dataset
was cropped to the region of interest, containing only one lipid droplet (rf. Figure 3). The 3D
volume of the lipid droplet structure reconstructed by thresholding and post-processing of aligned
and smoothed FIB slices is presented in Figure 9. For the last dataset, thresholds were set to 3 and 54,
according to the histogram local minima as described above (Figure 4).

      The inhomogeneous structure is observed only in some lipid droplets. The causes and effects of
these inhomogeneities should be further investigated.
Computation 2016, 4, 35  12 of 16

      Segmentation of the whole myocyte cell 3D structure is important for understanding of
myocardial tissue processes on a cellular level. There are two main points in the segmentation strategy
for EM images. First, automation is important for segmentation of EM data because of its large size
and cellular structure complexity. Manual or semi-automatic segmentation is very difficult in the EM
case. Second, EM images contain a variety of different objects (mitochondria, t-tubules, etc.) with
overlapping intensity ranges. It is difficult to segment these structures relying only on the local image
statistics. In addition, algorithms based on thresholding are inapplicable in most cases.

       Figure 9. 3D volume reconstruction of a lipid droplet. (a) internal structure of lipid droplet;
       (b) whole structure.

      Several works were published on EM segmentation [33,51], but none of these algorithms were
yet tested with the structure of myocyte cells. These methods are based on two fully automated
approaches: clustering and machine learning. According to [40], clustering downsamples the image
into supervoxels, meaningful regions that can be used to replace the rigid structure of the voxel grid.
Machine learning does not require special knowledge of the object structure and relies on global
image statistics. In summary, the combination of these two approaches satisfies both requirements
of EM image segmentation and may be applied to all cell structures. Thus, it should be tested on
myocyte EM images.

4. Discussion

      Image segmentation is a crucial process in biomedical modeling. Complex models require
segmentation of complex biological structures. Regardless of the image scale, one can use the
thresholding technique, if the structure to be segmented has distinct intensity range. However,
when several organs or organelles have overlapping intensity ranges, more complex methods are
required. In the case of EM, local image statistics are not sufficient in contrast to vessel or abdominal
organs segmentation where local information (vesselness and texture features) provides good results.
Examples of the overlapping intensities are presented in this work: bone tissue and arteries in ceCTA,
abdominal parenchymal organs in CTA, and organelles of myocyte cells in EM. Examples of distinct
intensity ranges are lungs in CTA and lipid droplets in EM.

      All of the proposed techniques consist of the following common steps: image pre-processing,
feature detection, initial mask generation, mask processing, and segmentation post-processing.
These techniques have several limitations. Similar intensity values of adjacent organs make boundary
detection difficult in abdominal segmentation; we use portal phase ceCT images to overcome
this problem. The vessel segmentation algorithm is designed for cubic voxels and performs well
for slightly anisotropic voxel grids; highly anisotropic grids should be resampled prior to the
segmentation process. Both CT and ceCTA images are required for automatic cerebral arteries
segmentation; an additional supervised preprocessing step is needed in case only ceCTA data are
available. Nevertheless, the proposed and discussed techniques and algorithms for CTA, ceCTA
Computation 2016, 4, 35  13 of 16

and EM images show reasonable applicability for object-specific segmentation on various datasets
modalities and scales. These methods extend the applicability of the cardiovascular modeling
algorithms. Further improvements allow us to create an automated segmentation framework needed
for patient- and object-specific numerical modeling.

      The important example of modeling application includes the patient-specific haemodynamics
modeling. Automatic and correct segmentation of arteries result in more accurate simulation.
Another important cardiovascular application is the ECG forward calculation. Automatic algorithms
for segmentation of lungs, muscles, fat tissues, and abdominal organs decrease the uncertainty of
numerical ECG models.

      As the automatic segmentation techniques will eventually be included in everyday practice, the
efficiency and speed of the algorithms will become crucial. Some computationally expensive steps of
the segmentation process have a great potential to be accelerated using massive parallel programming
on GPU devices. For instance, time effectiveness of the proposed cerebral segmentation algorithm can
be improved with a parallel version of Frangi Vesselness, which is computed in each voxel of the 3D
dataset. Our preliminary experience in accelerating the processing code using OpenCL technology
shows promising results.

5. Conclusions

      We presented several techniques of image segmentation for cardiovascular biomedical
applications. Segmentation of abdominal parenchymal organs, vessels, and lipid droplets was
addressed. The algorithms were designed with automation in mind; user interaction was minimized.
The results demonstrated reasonable applicability of the proposed methods to medical image data.
OpenCL-accelerated version of the texture-based segmentation algorithm was implemented and
tested, showing good computation speed-up. In future work, the segmentation methods will be
improved, particularly concerning extension of applications range, inclusion of machine learning
techniques, and parallel acceleration.

Supplementary Materials: The 3D volume reconstruction of internal lipid droplet structure (ref. Figure 9) and
the segmented models of cerebral arteries are available online at www.mdpi.com/2079-3197/4/3/35/s1. Please
note that the research code and DICOM datasets are available upon request.

Acknowledgments: The research was supported by Russian Science Foundation grant 14-31-00024. The authors
thank Igor R. Efimov of the George Washington University, Department of Biomedical Engineering, for providing
the FIB image dataset. The authors acknowledge the staff of I. M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University
and especially Philippe Yu. Kopylov, Nina V. Gagarina, Ekaterina V. Fominykh, Andrey N. Dzyundzya for
patient-specific data.

Author Contributions: Roman Pryamonosov and Alexandra Yurova developed, implemented and tested the
presented segmentation techniques; Alexander Danilov conceived the study and participated in its design and
coordination; All authors wrote, read and approved the final manuscript.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

1. Dazzo, F.; Niccum, B. Use of CMEIAS Image Analysis Software to Accurately Compute Attributes of
       Cell Size, Morphology, Spatial Aggregation and Color Segmentation that Signify in situ Ecophysiological
       Adaptations in Microbial Biofilm Communities. Computation 2015, 3, 72­98.

2. Kislitsyn, A.; Savinkov, R.; Novkovic, M.; Onder, L.; Bocharov, G. Computational Approach to 3D Modeling
       of the Lymph Node Geometry. Computation 2015, 3, 222­234.

3. Sazonov, I.; Yeo, S.Y.; Bevan, R.L.T.; Xie, X.; van Loon, R.; Nithiarasu, P. Modelling pipeline for
       subject-specific arterial blood flow--A review. Int. J. Numer. Methods Biomed. Eng. 2011, 27, 1868­1910.

4. Quarteroni, A.; Tuveri, M.; Veneziani, A. Computational vascular fluid dynamics: Problems, models and
       methods. Comput. Vis. Sci. 2000, 2, 163­197.

5. Gerbeau, J.F.; Vidrascu, M.; Frey, P. Fluid­structure interaction in blood flows on geometries based on
       medical imaging. Comput. Struct. 2005, 83, 155­165.
Computation 2016, 4, 35  14 of 16

6. Holtzman-Gazit, M.; Kimmel, R.; Peled, N.; Goldsher, D. Segmentation of thin structures in volumetric
       medical images. IEEE Trans. Image Proc. 2006, 15, 354­363.

7. Radaelli, A.G.; Peiró, J. On the segmentation of vascular geometries from medical images. Int. J. Numer.
       Methods Biomed. Eng. 2010, 26, 3­34.

8. Yeo, S.Y.; Xie, X.; Sazonov, I.; Nithiarasu, P. Segmentation of biomedical images using active contour model
       with robust image feature and shape prior. Int. J. Numer. Methods Biomed. Eng. 2014, 30, 232­248.

9. Rohlfing, T.; Brandt, R.; Menzel, R.; Russakoff, D.B.; Maurer, C.R. Quo Vadis, Atlas-Based Segmentation?
       In Handbook of Biomedical Image Analysis: Volume III: Registration Models; Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 2005;
       pp. 435­486.

10. Isgum, I.; Staring, M.; Rutten, A.; Prokop, M.; Viergever, M.; van Ginneken, B. Multi-Atlas-Based
       Segmentation with Local Decision Fusion-- Application to Cardiac and Aortic Segmentation in CT Scans.
       IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2009, 28, 1000­1010.

11. Wang, H.; Suh, J.W.; Das, S.R.; Pluta, J.B.; Craige, C.; Yushkevich, P.A. Multi-Atlas Segmentation with Joint
       Label Fusion. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2013, 35, 611­623.

12. Lines, G.; Buist, M.; Grottum, P.; Pullan, A.; Sundnes, J.; Tveito, A. Mathematical models and numerical
       methods for the forward problem in cardiac electrophysiology. Comput. Vis Sci. 2002, 5, 215­239.

13. Zemzemi, N.; Bernabeu, M.O.; Saiz, J.; Cooper, J.; Pathmanathan, P.; Mirams, G.R.; Pitt-Francis, J.;
       Rodriguez, B. Computational assessment of drug-induced effects on the electrocardiogram: From ion
       channel to body surface potentials. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2013, 168, 718­733.

14. Hughes, T.J.; Lubliner, J. On the one-dimensional theory of blood flow in the larger vessels. Math. Biosci.
       1973, 18, 161­170.

15. Zarins, C.K.; Taylor, C.A.; Min, J.K. Computed Fractional Flow Reserve (FFTCT) Derived from Coronary
       CT Angiography. J. Cardiovasc. Transl. Res. 2013, 6, 708­714.

16. Morris, P.D.; Ryan, D.; Morton, A.C.; Lycett, R.; Lawford, P.V.; Hose, D.R.; Gunn, J.P. Virtual
       Fractional Flow Reserve from Coronary Angiography: Modeling the Significance of Coronary Lesions.
       JACC Cardiovasc. Interv. 2013, 6, 149­157.

17. Sulkin, M.S.; Yang, F.; Holzem, K.M.; Leer, B.V.; Bugge, C.; Laughner, J.I.; Green, K.; Efimov, I.R. Nanoscale
       three-dimensional imaging of the human myocyte. J. Struct. Biol. 2014, 188, 55­60.

18. Haralick, R.M.; Shanmugam, K.; Dinstein, I. Textural Features for Image Classification. IEEE Trans. Syst.
       Man Cybern. 1973, 3, 610­621.

19. Frangi, A.; Niessen, W.; Vincken, K.; Viergever, M. Multiscale Vessel Enhancement Filtering. In Medical
       Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Interventation ­ MICCAI'98; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
       1998; pp. 130­137.

20. Sethian, J. Level Set Methods and Fast Marching Methods: Evolving Interfaces in Computational Geometry, Fluid
       Mechanics, Computer Vision, and Materials Science; Number 3 in Cambridge Monographs on Applied and
       Computational Mathematics; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1999.

21. Grady, L. Fast, Quality, Segmentation of Large Volumes--Isoperimetric Distance Trees. In Computer
       Vision--ECCV 2006; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2006; pp. 449­462.

22. Pudney, C. Distance-Ordered Homotopic Thinning: A Skeletonization Algorithm for 3D Digital Images.
       Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 1998, 72, 404­413.

23. Danilov, A.; Ivanov, Y.; Pryamonosov, R.; Vassilevski, Y. Methods of Graph Network Reconstruction in
       Personalized Medicine. Int. J. Numer. Methods Biomed. Eng. 2016, 32, e02754.

24. Danilov, A.A.; Nikolaev, D.V.; Rudnev, S.G.; Salamatova, V.Y.; Vassilevski, Y.V. Modelling of bioimpedance
       measurements: Unstructured mesh application to real human anatomy. Russ. J. Numer. Anal. Math. Model.
       2012, 27, 431­440.

25. Vassilevski, Y.V.; Danilov, A.A.; Simakov, S.S.; Gamilov, T.M.; Ivanov, Y.A.; Pryamonosov, R.A.;
       Simakov, S.S. Patient-specific anatomical models in human physiology. Russ. J. Numer. Anal. Math. Model.
       2015, 30, 185­201.

26. Danilov, A.A.; Pryamonosov, R.A.; Yurova, A.S. Image segmentation techniques for biomedical modeling:
       Electrophysiology and hemodynamics. In Proceedings of the 7th European Congress on Computational
       Methods in Applied Sciences and Engineering (ECCOMAS 2016), Crete Island, Greece, 5­10 June 2016.
Computation 2016, 4, 35  15 of 16

27. Yang, G.; Kitslaar, P.; Frenay, M.; Broersen, A.; Boogers, M.J.; Bax, J.J.; Reiber, J.H.C.; Dijkstra, J. Automatic
       Centerline Extraction of Coronary Arteries in Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiography. Int. J.
       Cardiovasc. Imaging 2012, 28, 921­933.

28. Tek, H. Automatic Coronary Tree Modeling. The Midas Journal--2008 MICCAI Workshop Grand
       Challenge Coronary Artery Tracking. 2008. Available online: http://hdl.handle.net/10380/1426
       (accessed on 7 September 2016).

29. Manniesing, R.; Viergever, M.A.; van der Lugt, A.; Niessen, W.J. Cerebral Arteries: Fully Automated
       Segmentation from CT Angiography--A Feasibility Study 1. Radiology 2008, 247, 841­846.

30. Gao, X.; Uchiyama, Y.; Zhou, X.; Hara, T.; Asano, T.; Fujita, H. A Fast and Fully Automatic Method for
       Cerebrovascular Segmentation on Time-of-Flight (TOF) MRA Image. J. Digit. Imaging 2011, 24, 609­625.

31. Ho, H.; Bier, P.; Sands, G.; Hunter, P. Cerebral artery segmentation with level set methods. In Proceedings
       of Image and Vision Computing New Zealand 2007, Hamilton, New Zealand, 5­7 December 2007;
       pp. 300­304.

32. Cuisenaire, O. Fully automated segmentation of carotid and vertebral arteries from CTA. The Midas
       Journal--Carotid Lumen Segmentation and Stenosis Grading (Grand Challenge). 2009. Available online:
       http://hdl.handle.net/10380/3100 (accessed on 7 September 2016).

33. Lucchi, A.; Smith, K.; Achanta, R.; Knott, G.; Fua, P. Supervoxel-Based Segmentation of Mitochondria in
       EM Image Stacks with Learned Shape Features. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2012, 31, 474­486.

34. Keller, D.U.J.; Weber, F.M.; Seemann, G.; Dössel, O. Ranking the Influence of Tissue Conductivities on
       Forward-Calculated ECGs. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2010, 57, 1568­1576.

35. Zhao, B.; Colville, J.; Kalaigian, J.; Curran, S.; Jiang, L.; Kijewski, P.; Schwartz, L.H. Automated
       Quantification of Body Fat Distribution on Volumetric Computed Tomography. J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr.
       2006, 30, 777­783.

36. Armato, S.G.; Sensakovic, W.F. Automated lung segmentation for thoracic CT. Acad. Radiol.
       2004, 11, 1011­1021.

37. Zhang, J.; Yan, C.H.; Chui, C.K.; Ong, S.H. Fast segmentation of bone in CT images using 3D adaptive
       thresholding. Comput. Biol. Med. 2010, 40, 231­236.

38. Chung, H.; Cobzas, D.; Birdsell, L.; Lieffers, J.; Baracos, V. Automated segmentation of muscle and adipose
       tissue on CT images for human body composition analysis. In Proceedings of the Medical Imaging 2009:
       Visualization, Image-Guided Procedures, and Modeling, Lake Buena Vista, FL, USA, 7 February 2009.

39. Danilov, A.; Kramarenko, V.; Nikolaev, D.; Yurova, A. Personalized model adaptation for bioimpedance
       measurements optimization. Russ. J. Numer. Anal. Math. Model. 2013, 28, 459­470.

40. Achanta, R.; Shaji, A.; Smith, K.; Lucchi, A.; Fua, P.; Süsstrunk, S. SLIC Superpixels Compared to
       State-of-the-Art Superpixel Methods. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2012, 34, 2274­2282.

41. Campadelli, P.; Casiraghi, E.; Pratissoli, S.; Lombardi, G. Automatic Abdominal Organ Segmentation from
       CT images. Electron. Lett. Comput. Vis. Image Anal. 2009, 8, 1­14.

42. Chan, T.F.; Vese, L.A. Active Contours without Edges. IEEE Trans. Image Proc. 2001, 10, 266­277.
43. Marquez-Neila, P.; Baumela, L.; Alvarez, L. A Morphological Approach to Curvature-Based Evolution of

       Curves and Surfaces. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2014, 36, 2­17.
44. Yushkevich, P.A.; Piven, J.; Cody Hazlett, H.; Gimpel Smith, R.; Ho, S.; Gee, J.C.; Gerig, G. User-Guided 3D

       Active Contour Segmentation of Anatomical Structures: Significantly Improved Efficiency and Reliability.
       Neuroimage 2006, 31, 1116­1128.
45. Van Andel, H.A.F.G.; Venema, H.W.; Streekstra, G.J.; van Straten, M.; Majoie, C.B.L.M.; den Heeten, G.J.;
       Grimbergen, C.A. Removal of Bone in CT Angiography by Multiscale Matched Mask Bone Elimination.
       Med. Phys. 2007, 34, 449­462.
46. Duda, R.O.; Hart, P.E. Use of the Hough Transformation to Detect Lines and Curves in Pictures.
       Commun. ACM 1972, 15, 11­15.
47. Johnson, H.J.; McCormick, M.M.; Ibanez, L. The ITK Software Guide Book 2: Design and Functionality;
       Kitware, Inc.: Clifton Park, NY, USA, 2015; Volume 2.
48. OsiriX. DICOM Image Sample Sets. Available online: http://www.osirix-viewer.com/datasets (accessed
       on 9 September 2016).
Computation 2016, 4, 35  16 of 16

49. Gamilov, T.; Pryamonosov, R.; Simakov, S. Modeling of patient-specific cases of atherosclerosis in carotid
       arteries. In Proceedings of the 7th European Congress on Computational Methods in Applied Sciences and
       Engineering (ECCOMAS 2016), Crete Island, Greece, 5­10 June 2016.

50. Gamilov, T.; Kopylov, P.; Pryamonosov, R.; Simakov, S. Virtual Fractional Flow Reserve Assesment in
       Patient-Specific Coronary Networks by the 1D Model of Haemodynamics. Russ. J. Numer. Anal. Math. Model.
       2015, 30, 269­276.

51. Lucchi, A.; Smith, K.; Achanta, R.; Lepetit, V.; Fua, P. A Fully Automated Approach to Segmentation of
       Irregularly Shaped Cellular Structures in EM Images. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
       Intervention--MICCAI 2010; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2010; pp. 463­471.

                               c 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                               article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                               (CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
